---
layout: post
title: "Women in the Olympic Games: From Paris 1900 to Paris 2024"
date: 2024-07-26
tags: ["sport", "equality"]
author: unseen
categories: unseen
logo: 'assets/images/seen-logo-dark.png'
cover: 'assets/images/heraean-olympics.jpg'
navigation: True
class: post-template
subclass: 'post'
---

The Olympic Games have long been a symbol of human excellence, unity, and the relentless pursuit of athletic achievement. However, the journey to equality between men and women within this prestigious event has been a winding path, filled with significant milestones and pioneering figures. 

Women were excluded from the first modern Olympic Games in 1896 because its founder thought that their participation would be inappropriate. And in the Ancient Olympic Games, women were barred from competing and married women were barred altogether or thrown off a mountain as punishment for illegal attendance.Women in Ancient Greece started their own Olympics, called the Heraean Games, which honoured the Greek goddess Hera.  

From the first inclusion of female athletes in Paris 1900 to the equal numbers achieved in Paris 2024, the evolution of female participation in the Olympics is a testament to progress and perseverance.

#### Paris 1900: A Historic Beginning

The 1900 Paris Olympic Games marked a pivotal moment in the history of sports, as it was the first time women were allowed to compete. This inclusion was not a straightforward triumph but rather a nuanced and often overlooked part of the Games. Out of the 997 athletes who participated, only 22 were women, competing in just five sports: tennis, sailing, croquet, equestrianism, and golf.

One of the most notable figures from these Games was Hélène de Pourtalès, a Swiss sailor. On 22nd of May 1900, de Pourtaès boarded the yacht Lerina as part of the Swiss crew that won the first of two 1-2 ton class regattas that would take place at the Paris 1900 Games. She then became the first ever woman to participate at the Olympics and the first woman to win a medal at the Olympics. Her crew returned in silver medal position the following day in the second 1-2 ton regatta, making her also the first female multiple medallist in history.

#### The Evolution of Female Participation

The years following 1900 saw a gradual but steady increase in female participation in the Olympic Games. Each successive Games witnessed more women competing in a broader range of sports. The introduction of women’s swimming events in Stockholm 1912 and then women's athletics and gymnastics in Amsterdam 1928 were significant steps forwards. By the mid-20th Century, the momentum for equality between the sexes in the Olympics was undeniable.

The late 20th and early 21st centuries saw the International Olympic Committee (IOC) making more concerted efforts to promote the inclusion of women. Initiatives were introduced to increase the number of sports and events available to female athletes. The 2012 London Olympics were particularly notable, as they were the first Games where women competed in all the sports on the Olympic program. Additionally, the number of female athletes reached 44% of the total participants.

#### Paris 2024: A Milestone

The 2024 Paris Olympic Games are set to be a historic event, as they will feature an equal number of male and female athletes for the first time in Olympic history. This milestone represents a culmination of over a century of efforts to achieve equality between women and men in sport. 

Paris 2024 will see approximately 10,500 athletes, with an equal split between men and women. This achievement is not just a numerical triumph but a profound statement on the importance of equality and equity in sports.

#### The Road Ahead

While reaching equality in male and female athlete numbers is a significant achievement, the journey towards true equality in sports continues. Efforts must persist to ensure equal representation in coaching, leadership, and decision-making positions within the Olympics and the wider sporting communities. In particular, significant action is required to address the inequality in senior decision making positions in international sport organisations. For example, only 30% of the world's largest sports federations were chaired by women in 2023. Addressing disparities in media coverage, sponsorship, and funding between male and female athletes remains a critical area for progress. 

One of the most pressing barriers for women in sport today is the persistent problem of sexual harassment and abuse, which not only undermines the dignity and safety of female athletes, but impedes their progress and participation. Creating a safe and respectful environment for all athletes is critical to achieve true equality.

The journey is far from over, but with each step, we move closer to a future where every athlete, regardless of their sex, can pursue their Olympic dreams on equal terms.

Many thanks to the following articles which I used in the research for this piece:
- _UNESCO Report_ \| _[UNESCO Report: Women and girls access to sport still lagging far behind](https://www.unesco.org/en/articles/unesco-report-women-and-girls-access-sport-still-lagging-far-behind)_
- _Atlas Obscura_ \| _[When Ancient Greece Banned Women From Olympics, They Started Their Own](https://www.atlasobscura.com/articles/when-ancient-greece-barred-women-from-even-watching-the-games-they-started-their-own-olympics)_
- _UN Women_ \| _[Paris 2024 Olympics: A new era for women in sport](https://www.unwomen.org/en/paris-2024-olympics-new-era-for-women-in-sport)_
- _Olympics.com_ \| _[International Women's Day: Five historic firsts for female Olympians](https://olympics.com/en/news/five-historic-firsts-for-female-olympians)_

**Cover photo** <a href="https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Prospero_Piatti_-_Giochi_Erei_(1901).jpg">Wikipedia Public Domain</a>.
